---
layout: post
title:  "Turning Off InnoDB"
date:   2016-01-05 12:00:00
categories: mysql-innodb
---

Oracle recommends InnoDB as the preferred storage engine for typical database applications, from single-user wikis and blogs running on a local system, to high-end applications pushing the limits of performance. In MySQL 5.7, InnoDB is the default storage engine for new tables. 

As of MySQL 5.7.5, InnoDB cannot be disabled. The --skip-innodb option is deprecated and has no effect, and its use results in a warning. It will be removed in a future MySQL release. This also applies to its synonyms (--innodb=OFF, --disable-innodb, and so forth). Before 5.7.5, if you do not want to use InnoDB tables: 

- Start the server with the --innodb=OFF or --skip-innodb option to disable the InnoDB storage engine. 
- Because the default storage engine is InnoDB, the server will not start unless you also use --default-storage-engine and --default-tmp-storage-engine to set the default to some other engine for both permanent and TEMPORARY tables. 
- To prevent the server from crashing when the InnoDB-related information_schema tables are queried, also disable the plugins associated with those tables. Specify in the [mysqld] section of the MySQL configuration file: 

{% highlight sql %}
loose-innodb-trx=0 
loose-innodb-locks=0 
loose-innodb-lock-waits=0 
loose-innodb-cmp=0 
loose-innodb-cmp-per-index=0
loose-innodb-cmp-per-index-reset=0
loose-innodb-cmp-reset=0 
loose-innodb-cmpmem=0 
loose-innodb-cmpmem-reset=0 
loose-innodb-buffer-page=0 
loose-innodb-buffer-page-lru=0 
loose-innodb-buffer-pool-stats=0 
loose-innodb-metrics=0 
loose-innodb-ft-default-stopword=0 
loose-innodb-ft-inserted=0 
loose-innodb-ft-deleted=0 
loose-innodb-ft-being-deleted=0 
loose-innodb-ft-config=0 
loose-innodb-ft-index-cache=0 
loose-innodb-ft-index-table=0 
loose-innodb-sys-tables=0 
loose-innodb-sys-tablestats=0 
loose-innodb-sys-indexes=0 
loose-innodb-sys-columns=0 
loose-innodb-sys-fields=0 
loose-innodb-sys-foreign=0 
loose-innodb-sys-foreign-cols=0 
{% endhighlight %}